Test 1, 2, 3. This
is an interview with Colonel Barbé by Christian
Williams on 29 April 1993 at the Trigon concerning
Colonel Barbé's experiences in Vietnam. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I am asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
Is that all right with you, sir? Sure
is. Please state your name, sir. Yeah, my name's
William Leland Barbay. You're in current
position to hold the university, sir? I'm the
professor of naval science and the CO of the NROTC
unit. Your date of birth, sir, and place of birth? I
was born in Kinston, North Carolina on 4 April,
1942. Sir, if you could briefly tell me a little bit
about your parents, their careers, and your
family life. Well, I'm a Marine junior. My dad was a
career Marine, was in the Marine Corps for 27 years
and fought in both the World War II and the Korean
conflict.
I can follow it up to say I kind of lived all over the
United States and overseas as a child. I mean, as my
dad traveled quite a bit, being in the military. So
what motivated you to become a Marine officer?
Well, I've always been a very patriotic person. I
kind of grew up in the Marine Corps. I was used to
kind of the Marine Corps way of life. I love to
travel. I love adventure. I love a challenge. So
that was kind of my motivation toward a career in
the military. Where did you attend college, sir? I
went to the United States Merchant Marine Academy
at Kings Point. It's one of the five federal
academies, probably the least well-known, but
nonetheless a federal academy. What was your
reason for choosing this particular school, sir?
Well, I had an appointment to the Naval Academy. I
got an appointment to the Merchant Marine Academy
from Senator Robinson of Virginia, and my best
buddy also got an appointment, and he really
talked me into going there. It's a small school
with a regiment of about 1,000 cadets, and It
sounded interesting to me, so I went. Sir, when did
you report for OCS or begin your Marine career?
Well, when I graduated from college, I was
commissioned instant in the Navy, in active Naval
Reserve. I sailed the merchant Marines for one
year. I sailed with the MSCS. It was called MSTS
then, Military Sealift Transportation Service,
on the USS General Patch, which was a troop
transport going between New York and Germany.
About that time, the Vietnam War broke out. I had a
twin brother who was a second lieutenant in the
Marine Corps then, who was about to go to Vietnam.
So I got real motivated to say, hey, I need to serve
my country. So I resigned from the Air Reserve
Commission and came to the Marine Corps through
OCS in 1965, March of 1965. So in essence, you
volunteered for duty in Vietnam by going ahead and
joining the Marine Corps as an officer? Well, I
joined the Marine Corps at that time. Vietnam War
was just starting to get, the buildup was just
starting over there. I was commissioned in June of
1965 and went to flight school. I'm a naval
aviator, so I went to flight school down in
Pensacola, Florida. I was there. They had an
accelerator program because of the Vietnam War,
so I went through flight school in about ten
months.
I took part in flight school and joined my first
squadron down at Marinko Air Station, New River,
North Carolina. At that time, all my buddies were
very anxious to get over to the war, you know, and
get a taste of combat. So it wasn't a matter of
volunteering. If you were the unit that was going
to be assigned to go, you were going. When did you
first arrive in Vietnam, sir, and who did you serve
with, and in what role? I first arrived in Vietnam
in, let's see, May of 1967. I joined the Marine
Medium Helicopter Squadron 262, which was flying
out of the Marine Air Facility Marlowe Mountain,
which was on the coastline just east of Da Nang. I
was a squadron pilot primarily. However, I did
work in maintenance and did some work as a flight
officer. mainly flew. What types of missions did
you fly, sir? We flew assorted missions. The
squadron that I joined was, had entered country as
a brand new squadron about six months before I got
there, so we had relatively brand new airplanes,
and we flew almost
just about 2,400 hours a month. Primarily recon
insert extract. We did a lot of the troop assaults,
helicopter-borne assaults. We did medevac,
resupply, you name it. Basically, we did it. While
you were serving in this role, sir, did you ever
have any encounters with the ARVN forces? Were you
ever working directly? We did a lot of missions
with the ARVN where we did helicopter-borne
assaults and hauled the ARVN forces into... into a
strike area. I never during this part of my career
had any direct relationship with the Yardmans. I
had a twin brother who was a MACV SOG. I worked with
him on a day-to-day basis. Based on your knowledge
later in your career of the Yardmans, how would you
assess them as a fighting force? Well, the South
Vietnamese were were a developing force. You
could compare them to the South Koreans at the time
of the Korean War.
They weren't trained very well. They weren't
equipped very well. And it was a matter of working
with them, giving them the equipment, giving them
training. We did a lot of joint operations to try to
develop their capabilities.
But they were far inferior to the US forces and or
the Korean forces that were over there. What did
you feel about concerning their desire to fight,
their desire to save their country, sir? Were they
lacking? Were they lazy? I've read several
accounts in the book of Bright and Shining Light
where there have been several things said, and
also in the book about the lack of desire on the part
of the officers to do anything they wanted out of
that was to become part of the political
hierarchy. They really had no desire to take it to
the end, sir. Well, I would say that there were some
very good Arvin units. The Arvin Marines were very
good. They were well trained and they fought very
violently, but obviously there were some units
over there also that weren't as good.
Vietnam, the people were mainly peasants. You had
the hierarchy over there that were schooled and
had been more or less trained and developed by the
French from Vietnam, who obviously were maybe
uh using the war to meet their own political gains
but i think the peasants as a whole were supportive
of the war as far as the you know maintaining their
freedoms and freedom and you might say a state of
democracy however
my impression that they were basic peasants, they
were mainly farmers, and they just wanted to be
left alone. And they were caught up into a
humongous war, in which they could win. They could
not win. And what I mean by that is, if the American
forces occupied the territory and protected
them, they were on the side of the American forces.
But if we left the area, and the VVF-Con came in, or
the NVA units came in, well, then they were loyal to
the VVF-Con, where it was in power, where they were
loyal to kind of You understand what I'm saying?
Yes, sir. Prior to arriving in Vietnam, finding
out you were assigned to Vietnam, what
expectations or feelings or emotions did you have
concerning that assignment, sir? Well, I think
every young man wonders what combat's about. I
know I'm from a Marine family, and I just developed
buddies I went to high school with, The Marine
Corps were officers in the Marine Corps, and we're
going over to Vietnam to fight. I think knowing
that it's kind of an unknown. You're kind of
untested. You never know how someone's going to
respond in combat.
But I found when I got over there that it's doing a
job. You do what you're trained to do, and you get
served. At times you're scared. Sometimes
adrenaline's pumping. But you have a mission, and
you have a goal, and you try to achieve it.
What else was the question there? Which feelings,
expectations, or emotions
did you have prior to going to the military? Yeah, I
think that in the 67, 68 time frame,
I think most of the young men that went over to
Vietnam thought we were going over there for a good
cause. The cause was to stop the communism in South
Vietnam. We felt we were invited by the South
Vietnamese government That our government
committed the military forces and our government
was behind us. To understand that the military is
really a war is, let me put it this way,
war is an instrument of policy. The military is an
instrument of policy. So when the politicians and
the nation agree to commit forces, then the
military doesn't question why we go.
How did these feelings or emotions change as your
time in the country wore on, sir? From President
Johnson to President Nixon, the Vietnamization
plan, things like that, sir. How did those affect
your feelings, or did your feelings change as far
as the outcome of the war, sir? as far as why you
personally were there, sir? Well, I was in Penford
for almost two years, over two years. My first
tour, I flew helicopters. I fought in the Battle of
Quezon and the Battle of Waste City. I had the
squadron I was in during the siege of Quezon lost 30
aircraft and just about 10 air crews. I was shot
myself.
My second tour, I flew OB-10s as a light attack,
visual reconnaissance, forward air control
airborne, controlled over 550 flights of
fixed-wing aircraft, close air support on enemy
targets.
During my two years there, the thing that amazed me
was the American's military might, the power of
the We have troops in contact within minutes. We
could have artillery, naval gunfire, close air
support overhead, supporting friendly forces.
It was that way the entire time I was there. I never
saw us lose a battle. Like I say, I was very busy.
Flying over the Thames, I flew six hours a day,
seven days a week. I didn't have a lot of time to be
thinking about other things other than doing the
mission. You get up on a six-hour mission where
perhaps you have full Gs for... three hours,
flying in an un-air-conditioned cockpit at 120
degrees, firing your own ordnance, controlling
other airplanes, talking to troops on the ground
in a panic mode, you don't have a lot of time to be
thinking about anything but the mission. So the
thing, like I say, I was very proud of the American
Fighting Forces over there, and I think we did a
good job. However, it was discouraging from the
point is that We had so many political ties put on
us, restrictions, that the way we were going about
it, we could never win the war. We won a lot of
individual battles, but never won the war. All
right, sir. I was just curious as to what kind of
news you all received in country from the home
front. Did the news of the protests on the
campuses, things like that, get back to you and to
other Marines, sir? And if it did, how did it affect
the morale of the American fighting men in
country? Well, in those days, it didn't quite have
the
perhaps the media blitz they have in modern
warfare. But I think it probably impacted the
people more in the military back here in the States
than it did in any country. You know, the only
newspaper we got was Stargent Strikes, which was a
military paper that was really talked about
troops and people that were actually fighting in
combat. I think the biggest thing I can remember
that probably really hurt American military men
was in,
I believe it was in 69, it may have been the 70s, I
believe it was 69 when Jane Fonda went up to Hanoi.
We in the military considered her a traitor to the
nation. That hurt. But the thing is, when all these
demonstrations were going on, and the peace
movements, and the campus unrest, I missed most of
that because I was in Vietnam. I read a little bit
about it in the paper, but I wasn't here to actually
see it. So I never really felt the impact of that
until I got back and finally realized that I was
kind of an outcast because I was a military man. And
that was disappointing. Sir, what kind of
treatment did you receive from the public when you
came back to the United States following your
retreat? Well, that was almost kind of like a
non-treatment. Of course, a lot of people would
cuss at you and call you warmongers.
A lot of things were happening during that time. We
were burning recruit centers and buildings and a
lot of demonstrations outside military
facilities. Because I came in the military, and
the military is a very honorable profession. It's
a lot like being a doctor, you know, saying
equivalency, and it's a very honorable
profession. And for the average military man, we
didn't see that we were doing anything wrong. We
were doing, again, the military is an instrument
of policy. War is an instrument of policy. The
politicians who were voted by the American people
send the military in the action. The military,
we're not political. We do what we're told to do to
protect the Americans' interests. So for us, it
was a big disappointment.
Sir, obviously when you entered the conflict, you
entered it feeling that the Americans would more
than likely win the war and end the communist
aggression. If at any point, when did you change
your mind, considering the fact that we may not win
the war, and why did you change your mind, sir?
Well, I still to this day believe we could have won
the war if it was fought correctly. You've got to
understand, in Vietnam, we fought when the enemy
wanted to fight us. The enemy, at any time, could
run across the border in the Laos, Cambodia, North
Vietnam, and we couldn't chase them. We were
restricted to stay in South Vietnam. So they would
come across at a given time and fight. They would
usually lose that battle, go back across the
border, retrain, resupply, regroup, and wait
until the time was right to defeat an enemy. You've
got to go at a center of gravity, and that is the
enemy. You've got to go where the enemy is, and
you've got to defeat them. If the enemy's in North
Vietnam, you're going to North Vietnam. If it's in
Laos, you go to Laos. You try to isolate the enemy.
Instead, we were constricted into a boundary
where the enemy was given sanctuary, where they
could go where we couldn't touch them, and we'd
have to wait for them to come back in and fight. We
were micromanaged at the highest level, i.e., the
President of the United States, There were a lot of
things there that really tied our hands. I've made
time to go on a strike into a village and be shot at
and having Marines killed, but you weren't
allowed to fire in that village until you got
parents from Saigon to fire. I mean, it was just a
different type of war. Please understand that the
political situation then was such that I think
Congress knew what had to be done, but they were so
afraid that if we went into North Vietnam with
troops, that the Chinese and the Russians may have
come into the war, that they were afraid to do that.
So they were trying to keep it strictly, but you
know, you can't win a defensive war. We were on the
defense down here. The only time we could take the
offense is when the enemy took the offense and
attacked us. And then once we beat them, they ran
across the border. We did bomb across the border,
but we couldn't do anything. Again, what was the CG
of the Americans in the Vietnam's eyes? What they
saw was that they had time on their side. They saw
the will of the American people as their center of
gravity. I think they saw that if they waited long
enough, the American people would not stand for
our forces to be there, and eventually we would
pull out. And they were right. Sir, do you believe
that's the whole reason behind the 10th incident?
Because many military analysts have said that the
Viet Cong were crazy for launching that
offensive. They knew they couldn't win it. Well,
the Tet Offensive, I think they really thought
they could. If you look at, if you study the Battle
of Khe Sanh, for example, they saw Khe Sanh as
another din-din food. If you look where Khe Sanh
was located, it was located up on the northwest
corner of Vietnam. It was about six miles from
Laos. It was about ten miles south of the DMZ. It was
in a valley. It was surrounded by mountains. It set
to the west, which were rolling hills that went
into Laos. That offensive normally starts their
new year in January, and it's right during the
monsoon season. So they say, hey, we bring in
30,000, 40,000 troops. We surround Quezon. The
monsoons are there. If they can't get the air
support, we're going to beat them. Quezon only had
the 26 Marines up there. They had about 6,000 to
7,000 Marines, and they were surrounded by 30,000
to 40,000 NVA troops. Now, these were hardline NVA
soldiers, not yet conned. They had all kinds of
equipment up there. They had anti-aircraft guns.
They had artillery. They had rockets. They had
mortars. I was there the night the siege started. I
was flying medevac out of Quezon on the
surrounding hills. And I recall it was January 21,
1968. We took 1,600
rounds of artillery at that base that night. We hit
the ammo dump. The ammo dump took off for 48 hours.
It was just a massive, massive attack. But they
really felt if they could win that battle, the
Battle of Quezon, the siege, that they would be
victorious. And the Americans, just like the Dinh
Binh Phu when they beat the French, and the French
decided it was time to leave Vietnam, they'd had
enough. Well, Lyndon Johnson said we weren't
going to lose. case on them, and we didn't. It was a
Herculean effort that I think air support saved
the day. They had B-52 bombers bombing every 90
minutes. And that's what they call an arc light.
You know an arc light here? Yes, sir. They did have
sometimes 12 to 20 aircraft come over, and each
B-52 carries 125 500-pound bombs, and they had 20
of those times 125 coming down, and when they hit
the ground, they looked like an arc of light,
massive. They had air coverage 24 hours a day. Even
though the weather was bad, they did their radar
bombing using TTQ-10 radars with A6s. And a flight
of A6s carries 52 500-pound bombs. And this was
going on 24 hours a day around the compound of
Quezon. The fact is, I make a comparison. Before
the siege started up there, it was a beautiful
country site up there. I mean, it was luscious
green jungles. They had tigers, monkeys,
beautiful mountains. jungle canopy. In fact,
right on the south end of the runway there, Cason,
is a waterfall that dropped down about 200 feet
into the Belong Valley. Just a beautiful setting.
When that siege was over, it looked like the moon.
There wasn't anything green, just craters for as
far as you could look. It was massive. So the
Marines officially, I think the record said they
lost 204. I think we lost about 800, according to
the logs of the the time they stationed up there.
They say the NVA lost about 10,000, but they don't
know. With a massive bombing, they have lost major
units. It was massive. That was a big loss to the
South. That was a big loss, I mean, to North
Vietnam. And I think they really thought that
ahead of 68, they were going to win the war. Then
they realized they probably weren't, and it
became a matter of a waiting game. Again, you know,
strike, retreat, strike, retreat. just keep
killing off American troops, people back here
saying, hey, you know, peace movements, get us out
of there. You know, we've lost 50,000. We don't
lose any more. What's the cause? You know, the
government down in South Vietnam is corrupt. You
know, it's time to get out. So in some regards, you
know, I look at the way we're fighting the war,
we're going to win it. They had to make some major
policy changes for us to win the war. So looking at
it from that perspective, they're probably smart
with that. from a fighting man that won many
battles that I hate to say we lost. I understand.
Sir, almost 20 years after the fall of Saigon,
what, if anything, had you been one of the
politicians and, well, been the President of the
United States for that matter, would you have done
differently in Vietnam? Well, there are a lot of
lessons learned. I think if you study history
and... The American people, up until the Korean
conflict, had only fought unlimited wars. You
know what an unlimited war is. Unconditional
surrender. You kick ass, you take names, you
destroy the enemy, and you turn over the
government. But the Cree is the first time this
nation ever fought a limited war, and they didn't
like it. They weren't used to it. They're not used
to fighting for limited objectives. I think
Vietnam was the same way, and we didn't know how to
fight limited wars. But if you look at, I think
George Bush must have had a checklist for Desert
Storm to make sure that everything that happened
in Vietnam did not happen in Desert Storm. Let me
tell you what I mean. Number one, he declared war.
He got the will of the American people. He got the
consensus of Congress. He mobilized the
reserves. Once you mobilize the reserves, you're
mobilizing the citizen soldiers that are getting
more and more involved into the war. He had a firm
political objective. You know what his objective
was? It was to kick Kuwaitis correction, the
Iraqis out of Kuwait. That was the objective. What
was the objective of the Vietnam War? No one really
knew. Campaign for communism, what's that mean?
They knew where the defined boundaries were. It
wasn't micromanaged by the president. They gave
the total control of the war to military commander
Schwarzkopf.
There's some other things that I can't think of
right now, but, I mean, it was done exactly the way
it should have been done. And I think if we'd done
that same thing in Vietnam, number one, we may not
have gone in the first place. But if we did go, we
could have won it. Sir, what kind of strategy would
you have implemented in Vietnam had you been in
charge of all the troops in the country, i.e., the
strategic handling program? No, to me, what I
would have done is gone and defeated the North
Vietnamese Army. That's what you had to do.
Vietnam, it was so different than any war we've
ever fought in. You know, you hear, you know, it was
a guerrilla war. You had conventional forces
fighting. But you've got to understand that when
we got over there as an American fighting force,
the Viet Cong North NVA infrastructure was
throughout the South. They control all the
hamlets in the villages, and they did it through
terrorist tactics. I mean, very easy. If you go
into a village, you hang up the village chief's
wife on a stake and, you know, cut her open, let her
guts hang out, and people get the message, you
know, those people are in control. When we came in,
it's not like we started in the south tip of Vietnam
and just marched all the way north, and everything
behind us we owned. It never happened that way. We
moved in, we put forces in the north, some in the
central, some in the south, Everywhere we
physically occupied, we controlled. But all the
area around where we physically occupied, the
D.C. and the NBA controlled. And even if we would
have started to south and moved north, all they
would have done is pushed into Cambodia and Laos,
and then as soon as we got further north, they'd
come in behind us in the south. So you can't win a war
like that. You've got to be able to isolate the
enemy. We never isolated the enemy. We couldn't.
We had the boundaries put on us. They had no
boundaries. So what you had to do is find where the
majority of the NVA forces were. They're in North
Vietnam. You go up there. You can do your blockade.
You can do a big air assault like we did up at Iraq
where you're going to knock out their bases, their
supply dumps, their SAM sites, anything that's
strategic. But then you've got to go defeat the
army. You've got to locate the army. You've got to
beat them. That's how you win wars. And that's what
I would have done. Now, you say, well, that's easy
to say, Barbette. When you were sent to the White
House, you didn't understand the other
pressures. Well, I understand the other
pressures. I understand the concern about Russia
or the Chinese coming into the war. But you've got
to ask yourself, do you want to win the war or not? If
you want to win the war, you've got to take that
risk. If you didn't want to win the war, then we
couldn't have been over there. So you don't think
that Fletchmore would have gotten additional
troops to call for in 1968? No. That wouldn't have
made any difference? Wouldn't have made any
difference. it would not have made any
difference. Because, again, the troops still,
you couldn't fight the enemy. The enemy was in
Laos, Cambodia, and North Vietnam. They only came
across the border when they wanted to inflict
injury on you, and then they ran. So you think we
would have lifted the restrictions on operations
in Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam? change the
outcomes here? They would have made a big
difference. They would have made a big
difference. I even know after the Tet Offensive of
68, we were catching prisoners up in the Khe Sanh
area. There were kids that were 14 years old. The
NDA soldiers were 14 years old. Their morale was at
low at that point. They really lost. They really
thought they were going to come down into South
Vietnam and win. They lost big time. Without the
air power, there's no way they could defeat
American forces. No way whatsoever. They were
tenacious fighters. They could live in a hole, in a
tunnel, on a bag of rice for one week. Tough little
guys. I like the Iranians. They didn't quit. They
were tough little fighters. And I respect them as a
fighting force, but they couldn't beat us. But we
couldn't beat them either unless we could go fight
their army. We couldn't just wait for them to come
to us and then let them run away. That's what I'm
saying. The defeat, if you If you look at the...
I'll make a parallel here to Desert Storm. We
really fought a war of attrition. We fought a war of
attrition. Basically, the troops that are around
Kuwait, we cut off all their lines of
communications, all their supply lines. They
couldn't get reinforced. They couldn't even
communicate with their headquarters. Then we
went up there and bombed all their strategic
points, all their airfields, all their bases, all
their supply lines. you know, all the
headquarters and communication sites. So they
were isolated down there. Then the right time
came, and we surrounded them, and then we went in
and went in for their army and beat them. We had to
defeat their army. That was just the opposite.
Here in Vietnam, take the battery. Here you've got
South Vietnam here. Here's our forces in South
Vietnam, but the enemy isn't in South Vietnam.
They have, yeah, some Forces, small units of
forces there, they're going to keep harassing us
and firing mortars and rockets. But their main
army is in Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam. They
plan a major offensive. They come across the
border. They attack you. You fight. You win. They
retreat across the border. And you can't chase
them. You just stop. Then they sit there. They
regroup. They retrain. They resupply. And when
the timing's right, they come across again. In the
meantime, they're inflicting harassment
actions all the time through artillery or having
two or three guys sneak in through a base camp area
and fire a couple of mortars or a 122-round rocket
or whatever the case might be. So you can see
there's no way we could win unless they just
decided to give up because they had enough. And
those people, you've got to understand the Asian
mind. Time is on their side. Sir, historians
debate whether or not we won or lost the war. From
your perspective, sir, I'd like to hear your
thoughts on that question. My thoughts are, and
again I...